Okay so the "standard pattern" is

    2 2 1 2 2 2 1

or in rhythmic form

    [x.x.xx.x.x.x]

or in lilypond notation

    a4 a4 a8 a4 a4 a4 a8

this is by the way the interval pattern of the Major Scale; that is C to
D is 2 semitones, D to E also 2, E to F 1, etc. Rhythm however is our
only concern here; "Three Levels of the Standard Pattern" only uses the
standard pattern to form its beats.

The levels are multiple instances of the same standard pattern; each of
the "lower" levels are iterated through completely for each beat of the
level or levels "above" it:

    Level Beats
    4     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
           ^
    3     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
           ^
    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
           ^
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  - lowest level, only this one is heard
           ^

That is, level 1 plays 2,2,1,2,2,1 and then level 2 advances a beat,
level 1 plays again, level 2 advances another beat, etc and so on until
level 4 reaches the end of its beats and the music stops.

The main complication is the duration of the beats; these are based on
what each level is playing, as a whole iteration of level 1 fits exactly
into each beat of level 2, and so on up. Level 2 beats are short or
long, so considering only level 2 with level 1 there will be two
different duration patterns:

    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x] - duration 2
           ^ ^  ^ ^ ^
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x] - effective durations 4,4,2,4,4,4,2

and

    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x] - duration 1
               ^      ^
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x] - effective durations 2,2,1,2,2,2,1

Iterations of level 1 where level 2 is on a short beat will be half the
length of when level 2 is on a long beat. Same story with more levels,
only more numbers to cruch (hopefully by computer as such devices are
fairly good at performing "least common multiple" and other such maths).

The gist is that the work starts out slow--each level is on a long beat--
and then there are various complications, and then things get really
fast when the higher levels are all on or moving to the short beat:

    Level Beats
    4     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
               ^
    3     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
               ^
    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
           ^
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]
           ^

and then things slow down again as the higher levels shift back to
long beats:

    Level Beats
    4     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
                ^
    3     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
                ^
    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
           ^     
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]
           ^

and much later after more complications things get really fast again:

    Level Beats
    4     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
                      ^
    3     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
                      ^
    2     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]  (mute)
                      ^
    1     [x.x.xx.x.x.x]
           ^

and then the music stops after the lowest level plays the last seven
beats of the standard pattern (very quickly) (plus a final cadence).
Listen to the first seven notes again, that's also the standard pattern
(only slower).

References: "The Geometry of Musical Rhythm" p.79
